Born glamorous born compassionate

Chetan Bhagat

Author Chetan Bhagat writes exclusively for TOI about his meeting with the Dalai Lama.
Mumbai is a city known for its glamour events. Glittering film premieres, snazzy award ceremonies and flamboyant fashion shows occur round the year. In fact, the advertising tagline of the Bombay Times you hold is “born glamorous”.
In the city of glitz, one could wonder if an event by a spiritual leader would have any impact. And yet, the Dalai Lama’s event would go down as one of the best events of the year. For many events manage the razzmatazz, but few actually manage to touch you.
I had had sleepless nights after saying yes to Pritish Nandy’s invitation to moderate a session with His Holiness the Dalai Lama. And yet, one glance at His Holiness and all my nervousness evaporated. It didn't feel like I was meeting one of the world’s top religious leaders, it felt like I was meeting a friend. Funnily enough, everyone else felt the same.
Perhaps it was the Dalai Lama’s child-like sincerity. Or the fact that he didn’t talk to people from a pedestal, but became one of them. He joked and laughed. He referred to himself as ‘nothing extraordinary.’ He mentioned how Desmond Tutu once teased him that he was too mischievous and not holy enough for a Dalai Lama.
He also spoke what he felt was right and in the best interest of people. For how many religious heads have you heard advocating scientific methods; or saying that ‘in order to be compassionate, you don’t have to be religious’. Compassion is caring for the pain of others. Dalai Lama’s simple message — We ourselves can be happier and more peaceful, if we show compassion. This compassion extends not only to humans, but also to animals.
Many spiritual and religious gurus render advice. Yet, with His Holiness there is an instant connect. He doesn’t preach. He merely speaks what he feels. When he speaks about inner peace, you feel his inner peace. When he talks about happiness, you see joy in his eyes. As a result, everyone in the audience was transfixed.
He doesn’t take fixed positions. He doesn’t impose absolute solutions. Even in the case of compassion towards animals, he didn’t talk about shunning all animal products or becoming vegetarian. ‘The fishermen’s livelihood depends on catching fish,’ he said. In fact, the Dalai Lama is not completely vegetarian, something he admitted right at the start. What he suggests is reducing animal product consumption, and wherever possible avoid unnecessary cruelty. Such a pragmatic approach connects with people better and leads to more change, than utopian absolutes.
In a city that manufactures and sells dreams, and where fakeness and apathy are common elements of everyday life, the Dalai Lama’s visit served as a soothing balm. It is reassuring to know that someone who talks relentlessly about compassion and love, is still heard worldwide. It is heartening to know that despite all the injustices and evil we see around us, someone like His Holiness exists and is followed by millions for his positive thoughts. His impact tells you no matter how evil, fake or apathetic the world gets; humanity will always have hope. His Holiness didn’t just visit Mumbai. He blessed Mumbai. Many have tried to cultivate hate in our city. He was one of the rare few, who came and planted the seeds of compassion and love. Let us tear away the weeds of hate, and make what he planted blossom. Let us not only be born glamorous, but also be born compassionate.